# README

### 20CRV3

There are two sets of data that are available. From the NCAR RDA (and other web sources) is the ensemble mean analysis. This is the "best guess" when averaged across the 80 members. From the NERSC portal, there are also the 80 individual ensemble members archived on constant pressure surfaces in the troposphere. See `$BETACAST/acquire-data/CR20V3` for scripts and instructions on getting these files locally (approximately 6 TB per year).

For very recent dates (post-1980ish) with significant quantities of data being ingested into the reanalysis, it is likely that the ensemble mean is functionally similar to any individual ensemble member. For earlier periods (pre-1950ish), any individual ensemble member appears to deviate rather significantly from the mean, likely owing to the lack of constraining observations. In these cases, the "mean" field may be a very smoothed (deamplified) realization of the potential synoptic states.

Betacast supports handling CR20V3 in two ways. If the data source is `CR20V3` it will handle the mean fields. As of 2026, on NCAR you can just point to the RDA, but this should be easily handled enough with the mean fields available via NOAA, etc. This seems to be broadly stable and works "as is" in at least the low-top version of CESM.

```
time python ${BETACAST}/py_atm_to_cam/atm_to_cam.py \
  --datasource "CR20V3" \
  --YYYYMMDDHH 1862092112 \
  --wgt_filename "/glade/u/home/zarzycki/betacast/grids/map_cr20v3_0.70x0.70_TO_ne30np4_patch.20260210.nc" \
  --RDADIR "/glade/campaign/collections/rda/data/d131003/" \
  --data_filename "${RDADIR}/invariants/surface_height.nc" \
...
```

Alternatively, you can initialize with any individual ensemble member by appending `CR20V3-XXX` where `XXX` is the ensemble member key (e.g., `001` through `080`).

```
time python ${BETACAST}/py_atm_to_cam/atm_to_cam.py \
  --datasource "CR20V3-001" \
  --YYYYMMDDHH 1862092112 \
  --wgt_filename "/glade/u/home/zarzycki/betacast/grids/map_cr20v3_0.70x0.70_TO_ne30np4_patch.20260210.nc" \
  --RDADIR "/glade/u/home/zarzycki/scratch/globus" \
  --data_filename "/glade/campaign/collections/rda/data/d131003/invariants/surface_height.nc" \
  ...
```

In the ensemble member case, a unique aspect is that `RDADIR` points to the base level folder, where the YYYY subfolder with the relevant data is contained inside. So for example, in the above experiment, the pressure level individual ensemble member files should be in `/glade/u/home/zarzycki/scratch/globus/1862/`.

NOTE: As of Feb 2026, some years do not have 500, 600, and 650 hPa pressure levels available. I put a kill switch in the code if you pull a year that doesn't have these since it creates a relatively unbalanced initial state, but you can comment it out if you like to live dangerously.

Because the individual ensemble member pressure levels only go up to 200mb, extrapolation (or persistence) into the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere is problematic. The solution for individual ensemble member simulations is to also generate an initial condition from the mean file (above) and then "blend" the two files at the interface. This isn't perfect, but testing with 1800s era CR20V3 data indicates the solution is stable and the upper atmosphere evolution is far more plausible than just extrapolating from the top pressure level available in the individual ensemble member file.

To do this, run:

```
time python ${BETACAST}/py_atm_to_cam/vertical_blend.py ~/scratch/tmp_betacast/CR20V3-001.nc ~/scratch/tmp_betacast/CR20V3-mean.nc --blendLev 200 --taperScale 0.05
```

which blends file_a (CR20V3-001.nc) below 200hPa with file_b (CR20V3-mean.nc) above 200hPa, with a small taper between the two. file_a is subsequently updated with the new upper tropospheric conditions (file_b is read-only).

So a reasonable workflow for a single ensemble member is:
1. Generate a Betacast ncdata file from the ensemble mean CR20V3 (file_b)
2. Generate a Betacast ncdata file from the single-member CR20V3 (file_a)
3. Run `vertical_blend.py` to update file_a with the upper levels from file_b
4. Use file_a for initializing the model.



